(rock music)
Alright let's talk about actually sizing our
rows and our columns or sizing our tracks in CSS grid
and we're gonna have that relates to the box model.
So open up 07 sizing tracks and the starter file
that we have here, whoa I've got 15 different ones
in here now let's go ahead and make a bunch of columns.
We'll say grid-template-columns and so far we have
just been using pixels because it's sort of the easiest
to understand, 200px, 200px give it a save
you see that we have that.
Now what happens if we use percentages, cause I know
a lot of you will think like oh I would like to be
25%, 25%, 25% 25% right it all adds up to 100%
well now start to get that horizontal scroll
and why is that?
Well that's because we are really doing 25+25+25+25
+20px+20px+20px in between.
So we're really 60 pixels over and that's what's causing
that horizontal scroll.
So it's not that great idea to use percentages
to add up to 100%, don't get me wrong you can always
use percentages to maybe take up half of something
or 80% of something or a quarter of something but
if you're trying to do the whole song and dance
where you're trying to add up your values and then
subtract your grid gap from it, it's just going to be
a big headache.
So rather than use percentages in most case we're actually
going to be using what's called the fr unit
and that's what's referred to as the fractional unit.
So let's explain how this actually works.
Let's start off with just two columns, 200px, 200px
and give that a save, you'll notice that, here let's put
a big ol border on our grid, so border: 10px solid,
let's var it up, var yellow.
So this is our grid here which is the yellow, but we're
not using all of it that's because we've defined them
in pixels so what would be great is if we could
just evenly distribute each of the columns.
And that's where the fr unit comes in, the fractional unit.
What it does is, fractional units represent the amount
of space left, after all the elements are laid out.
So what happens is CSS Grid will first go and lay out
all of the columns that it needs to that have an explicit
width or have an explicit height in terms of rows.
So what it will do is it will say 200px and then 200px
and if I wanted to add a third column called 1fr,
what that's going to do is it's going to say well
this much is extra here, so I'm going to take up
that much, so if I give that a save now.
You'll see that that third column is now going to
take up however much room is left.
If I were to increase this to 400px there's going to be
quite a bit less left and 1fr is going to stand for that.
Interesting, okay now let's bring it back to just 200px
now I just have one column and lots of extra space.
If I were to say 1fr, 1fr each of these two new columns
are going to take up one amount of the, they're sorta
gonna split it between them and they're each
gonna be the same size, now if you've used a flex grow
or a flex shrink value this is works very similar to that.
In that you can start to double up these values.
So these aren't like pixels or percentages or anything
they're just in proportion to how much free space is left.
So if this one is 2fr, this one is going to take up
twice as much of the free space as this one.
So it does stand for fractional units but I kinda like
the idea of it standing for free space, fr.
So now we see that the 2fr is taking up twice the amount
of free space as that one.
Now that's great, because what I will often do,
is instead of using pixels at all if I just wanna
split it up really evenly I'll just do, 1fr,
and I'll just do that, whoa, I'll do that a couple of times
over and over, one two three four and that will give me
four equal columns and again the way that the browser
is going to be laying this out is that first it will
take away any hard needs that it has.
And in our case it needs to take away 60 pixels
because it has 20, 20, and 20 in the grid gap.
And then you've got a whole bunch of space left
and it will just evenly distribute the values
between all of them.
Let's look at how that would look if we have
grid template rows in our case if I give that a save,
nothing changed.
And why is that, well by default the height of the a grid
and this is very similar to display block elements.
The default height of an element is just however high
the contents are but the default width of the element
is as wide as the actual view port that we have.
I have some margin on the body here so things don't butt
up right against the browser.
So what could we do there?
Well you could put an explicit height on the container
so you could say height, I don't know something
like 600px and now you'll see that because we now
have a hard height to our grid, each of 'em are gonna
take up the amount and if I were to take the second one
and maybe make it 10fr, you'll notice that the second
row is taking up 10 times the amount of the free space
as the rest of 'em.
So fr units are extremely helpful before you reach
for percentages and again let me show you,
you could do 50% here and what that will do is it'll
first take 50% and then we have some free units but do not
try to add up to 100% rather try to reach for your fr units
in there, similarly we can also use pixels, and rems and ems
and any other units that you're used to.
But I find myself primarily using rems
and fr units in most cases.
The next think I want to talk to you about
is the auto keyword so let's get rid of the
rows here and let's get rid of all our columns
and what's the difference if I have auto and 1fr?
Well let's give it a save you can see that auto will
just adjust to the max size of the content so right now
you can see that it's likely the 13 or the 15 whatever
is the widest content that is defining
the width of this column.
So if I were to go into 3 and make it something
like Wes Bos Is Cool, you'll see that the entire column
becomes wider because that one element
is autosizing that column.
What you might expect here is that the one and the five
and the seven would just be much smaller
and only this one would go wider and what we really need
to know here about CSS grid is that it's a grid.
It's not going to just loosely place itself,
a lot of times people think that you can
sorta do a Pintrest based layout where everything just
fits into each other and while that sorta is possible,
we'll go into some examples in the future once we get
into more real world stuff, what you need to know is that
the auto keyword will just automatically size it
as far as you want, and we can mix and match that again
if I do auto 1fr again they'll sort of just go back
and forth, back and forth.
Now interesting so you see that these ones are really small
because the 13 is deciding the width whereas this one is
pretty wide because the Wes Bos Is Cool
is defining the width.
That's auto and fr unit, let's see ya in the next one.
(rock music)